Okay, so this may look familiar to some of you.
It is what I lovingly refer to
as the Project Folder Hellscape.
Looking at it, it's chaotic.
There's a lot of different folders
with not very informative names.
There's a lot of different files,
a lot of different versions of the same file,
and a lot of files that have really uninformative names,
like MD7, I have no idea what that means.
And at one point or another, when doing this project,
this was from my PhD, I asked myself,
where is that script?
And which file is current?
And what was I thinking months ago?
And I'm sure some of you can relate to this.
And so after I finished my PhD,
and I moved on to a postdoc,
I started to think, okay, how can I do this better?
How can I move away from this chaotic
Project Folder Hellscape into something more organized?
And so what if I told you that I found
that better way, that I could turn this chaos
into a nice, organized file structure
that I could use for every code-based project?
So you may ask, how?
Well, by structuring your project as an R package.
Thank you.
And I don't mean from the software development perspective,
where the primary goal of the project
is to end up with a production-ready R package.
I mean by using the actual file structure
of an R packaging package,
and leveraging the benefits of an R package
to better organize, document,
and ultimately share your code.
And so for the rest of this talk,
I wanna walk you through how I've used this workflow,
and I wanna provide you with examples
of tangible impacts that it's had on my work.
And so in order to give you a little bit of context
for one of the project I've used this approach on,
we need to travel back in time.
Back to June of 2021 in the Netherlands.
Now, I'm sorry, we all know what was happening in 2021.
The COVID pandemic was in full swing.
And the Netherlands had actually already experienced
multiple waves of infections denoted here by the blue line,
which shows daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases over time.
But things were looking up.
COVID-19 cases were decreasing,
vaccination was ongoing in adults,
and strict control measures were gradually being relaxed.
But the Dutch government was obviously concerned
with how best to continue relaxing control measures
while preventing future waves of infections.
And one of the ways that they were thinking of doing this
was by extending the vaccination campaign
to adolescents and children.
And so this is where I come in.
In my role, I was asked to do a modeling study
to try to determine the impacts
of extending the vaccination campaign
to adolescents and children,
and to try to tell them what impact that might have
on disease outcomes like infections and hospitalizations.
And so that is your context.
So for the remainder of the talk,
I'm gonna go through each of those steps
of the R package structure,
and I'm gonna keep coming back to this project
and show you how using this workflow
helped me perform this work.
So the first step is organize.
So in a typical project, you have different types of files.
You may have analysis scripts, data,
maybe some R functions,
and maybe some kind of documentation.
And every person has different ways
of organizing their projects.
And even the same person may have different ways
of organizing different projects.
And that can make it very difficult
to orient yourself within any given project.
But by using the R package structure,
now all of a sudden you have a consistent way
in which to organize every single project,
and every type of file has its own place.
So your function files will go in the R directory,
your analysis scripts and data can go in the inst directory,
and documentation can go in vignettes.
And actually, when you build the package,
R will yell at you if these are not in the right place.
And so with this organization comes more efficiency,
which was paramount in my work during the pandemic
because we did not have a lot of time to do this work.
And so I was able to orient myself and work efficiently,
which meant that I could update models rapidly
as new data became available, which it did consistently.
It meant that the analysis was delivered on time.
And so ultimately, my work was actually used
to directly inform public health policy decisions,
and the Dutch government did ultimately decide
to extend the vaccination campaign,
which affected over a million citizens.
But organization alone is not enough.
We need to be able to understand how, what, and why
we're doing aspects of a project.
And so let's go back to that old file structure.
So here we have a number of different documentation files,
maybe a code guide, maybe some description
of the methodology that the code is implementing,
and maybe a final report.
And it can be very hard to have a separate text file
in a repo that describes what the code is doing.
I once inherited a project where I was given
a repository of code and an academic manuscript.
The code was uncommented, undocumented,
and all I had to go off of was a method section
in an academic manuscript.
And if you've ever read an academic manuscript,
they are notoriously concise.
So I had a very small method section
with which to try to decipher the code I was looking at.
And it ended up, I had to end up rerunning all the code
and looking at intermediate results
to try to figure out what was going on.
And that took a lot of time.
But with an R package, you have the advantage
that documentation lives with the code.
And I want to highlight two important features
of R package documentation.
The first will be the automatically generated help files,
which gets stored in the man directory.
And the second are vignettes.
So if you use the ROxygen, or ROxygen, not really sure,
preamble above your function,
you can include really important information
about what that function is doing,
like what that function does, expected inputs,
expected outputs, and example usage.
And a really nice piece of this
is that this preamble lives with your function code.
So you can write this as your coding.
So it alleviates the problem
of having to write a bunch of code
and then go back a week, two weeks, a month later
and try to remember what you did and describe it.
So this way, you can document your code in real time.
The other very handy aspect of this preamble
is that when you build the package,
it creates automatically generated help files.
And so now, you can access this information
by running one line of code,
the question mark and function name.
So you don't have to go searching
through some sort of project directory
to find the information that you need
in order to run a function or use a code chunk.
It is easy to access.
And so you may actually find that by using these help files
that you don't need that code guide anymore.
That maybe you don't need a piece of documentation
that you would in a more traditional project.
And that's one less thing to have to update and manage.
And the second part of documentation
that I wanna touch on is the vignettes.
So I have only recently realized
how powerful these vignettes can be.
So you remember that project where I had a code base
and a methods paragraph?
With a vignette, you can actually incorporate text,
code and results.
So now all of a sudden,
I can actually describe what a code chunk is doing,
show the code chunk and then show the expected output.
And that's hugely beneficial
and it makes it much easier
to try to document a whole analysis.
The other really nice feature of a vignette
is that it can be version controlled
in the same way as your code.
So whereas if you have a Word file,
that Word file is being tracked via words track changes
and it's separate from your code.
So it increases the likelihood
that those two documents are gonna be out of sync.
With a vignette, it can also be version controlled
using GitHub like your code
and so it just makes the likelihood
of the documentation file and the code file
becoming out of sync much lower.
Can still happen, you still have to update
your documentation, but it increases the chance
that your documentation is current.
And so with the vignette, you may actually find
that you don't need a separate methodology document
and that maybe all you need is a final report.
And so with all this increased documentation
comes transparency.
And transparency is important in all projects
and particularly those that inform decision making.
And in the context of the COVID-19 vaccination,
this meant that the policy decisions
were being backed by transparent analysis
and this became extremely important because we were audited.
So the modeling work that I and my team did
during the pandemic was audited
by an international panel of experts
and they asked, why did you do this
at various points of times?
What assumptions did you make?
Why did you make those?
And because I used this approach, my work was traceable.
I could go back and say, I made that decision
because that was the information that we had at that time
and then we got new information on and on and on.
A second feature was that the public could understand
the scientific basis for the decisions that were being made
which was really, really critical in a global emergency
because governments were asking their citizens
to make extraordinary changes to their lives
and it was very frustrating for people to not understand
why they were being asked to do that
and just having to rely on the model.
And so this ultimately helped build more public trust
and you can think about the public in this sense
as my ultimate stakeholder.
And so imagine how this could build trust
with whatever stakeholders you're working with.
And so the first two features of this R package workflow
focus mainly on your individual workflow,
how you move through a project.
But what I think makes the R package really powerful
is that when you combine it
with some sort of file sharing platform,
whether that's GitHub or a shared network drive
or something, then all of a sudden
you have collaborative magic.
Because now all of a sudden you have this beautiful,
organized, standardized, documented,
for lack of a better word, package,
that enables you to install it easily.
So rather than having to source a bunch of separate scripts,
you can install a package in one line of code.
You also have a way to have seamless handovers.
So it becomes very easy for you to onboard a new person
or even for yourself to come back to a project
after six months.
Another important feature is that you can create
reusable tools that you and your colleagues
and other people at your organization can use.
So I found out in my team that actually me
and two other colleagues were all trying
to use the same method
and we were independently coding that.
But with this approach, someone can code it one time
and we can all use it.
And this is also really important in infectious disease work
because I realized that I'm lucky enough
to have the resources to build these tools.
That is not the case everywhere.
And it's very important that everyone has the capability
and the resources and the tools
with which to analyze their own data.
And finally, it facilitates collaboration.
So it's one thing to have a conversation
with someone outside your organization
or someone on another team about things you're working on,
but it changes the game when you're able to show them
what you're working on and generate ideas
for how you can either work on the current project
or extend it later.
And so with all of this sharing capability
comes reproducibility, which is a central principle
in scientific research.
And how this manifested during the COVID modeling
was that because I use this approach,
my model code was actually selected to be included
in a separate R package called Epidemics,
which serves as a transmission model library.
So they were able to take my code, make it better,
and include it in this other package for others to use.
Another thing was that I was able to be involved
in a European-wide effort to provide modeling results
to help inform COVID public health policy.
And that would have been much more difficult
if I hadn't used this approach.
And so ultimately, one national analysis
has now become a piece of international infrastructure
that will live beyond the work that I did.
And so now it's your turn.
I really encourage you to try using an R package structure
for your next project.
And if you're a little intimidated,
you've never made an R package,
there are some wonderful tools
and learning materials available.
And I want to point to two.
So one is the uses package,
which actually makes creating the R package structure
really, really easy.
And then the other is the R packages book,
which gives you details about every step of the process,
including some that I haven't even mentioned like testing.
And I promise you'll never go back to messy folders.
And I'm also happy to announce
that after years of sort of using this approach
and iteratively improving,
that I've just had my first package accepted to CRAN.
And I don't know that that would have been possible
without this.
So with that, I would be happy to take your questions
and please feel free to get in touch.
Thank you so much, Kylie.
We have a few questions here.
So the first one is,
are there any parts of the package workflow
you've needed to work around for this use case
to work well for you?
Yes.
So I'm gonna answer a slightly different question
in a way to answer that question.
So one of the things that I think a lot of people think of
when they start thinking about R packages and documentation
is that it costs time.
It costs time in order to do these different bits
that you may not invest in a different workflow.
And so there were times where we maybe had to focus more
on just getting the analysis results
and kind of tackle the documentation later
because we were under such tight timelines.
But ideally you'd be able to do both kind of together.
Amazing.
Yeah, we have quite a few here.
So I'm gonna get through them.
So how do you deal with multiple versions of data
or programs?
So the way that I dealt with it,
because like I said, we got new data all the time.
And I actually kept copies of the data,
different versions of the data
because I needed to be able to reproduce the model results
at a given time.
So I actually kept them in a data directory in the package.
Totally makes sense.
So do you have any recommendations for implementing
a shared package development workflow
when PHI is a factor
and online tools like GitHub aren't allowed?
Can you define PHI?
I wish I could.
It is a private health information.
Oh, private health.
Yeah, so that is one thing that I didn't mention
that obviously some of this can't be shared publicly.
Many of us work on projects where you can't share this.
In fact, I couldn't share this work publicly at first.
It had to be shown to the government and approved
and then it could be shared.
But I actually, my team works on GitLab,
which is in a secure environment.
And so this works fine within a secure environment.
As long as the team members are able to access
some sort of shared environment, it works really well.
Great.
What would you have done differently now
after seeing the European consortium changes to your code?
Oh, I would have done a ton of things differently.
I would have changed how I designed the whole model,
but I had about two weeks to create it.
And so it was just kind of like, all right,
just put something that works.
And that's funny because that was also a question
asked by the auditor.
But yeah, I would have made it more efficient,
but that's just, it was a fact of the situation.
How does your workflow work
with computationally heavy simulations?
Yeah, that's a good one.
So I don't actually do a lot
of computationally intensive simulations.
I was able to get it quite quick.
But I think what you can do is if you have the resources
to use some sort of high performance computing,
you can have the functionality within the package
and then you just run those simulations elsewhere.
But I don't think this would prevent you
from having the code in which to do something
that's computationally intensive.
Right.
Do you have any recommendations
for getting teammates on board
with this very different way of setting up projects,
especially with folks who are already resistant
to putting time into documentation?
Yes.
So I feel like this was asked by one of my colleagues.
I have struggled a lot
because I think they're tired of me talking about this
at work, but I'm finally making headway.
And basically I keep sort of showing them
the benefits of this and highlighting pain points
when it's not done and in gentle ways,
not like yelling at people.
But I do think showing how easy it can be
and how ultimately it can save time,
because that's always a consideration that,
oh, no, it's more work to make documentation.
But in the end, it will actually save you time
and make it easier for work to be done.
Amazing.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.